7178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 39, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Task-Aware Machine Unlearning and Its Application
in Load Forecasting
Wangkun Xu , Student Member , IEEE, and Fei Teng , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Data privacy and security have become a non-
negligible factor in load forecasting. Previous researches mainly
focus on training stage enhancement. However, once the model is
trained and deployed, it may need to ‘forget’ (i.e., remove the im-
pact of) part of training data if these data are found to be malicious
or as requested by the data owner . This paper introduces the con-
cept of machine unlearning which is speciﬁcally designed to remove
the inﬂuence of part of the dataset on an already trained forecaster .
However, direct unlearning inevitably degrades the model gener-
alization ability. To balance between unlearning completeness and
model performance, a performance-aware algorithm is proposed
by evaluating the sensitivity of local model parameter change us-
ing inﬂuence function and sample re-weighting. Furthermore, we
observe that the statistical criterion such as mean squared error,
cannot fully reﬂect the operation cost of the downstream tasks
in power system. Therefore, a task-aware machine unlearning is
proposed whose objective is a trilevel optimization with dispatch
and redispatch problems considered. We theoretically prove the
existence of the gradient of such an objective, which is key to
re-weighting the remaining samples. We tested the unlearning algo-
rithms on linear, CNN, and MLP-Mixer based load forecasters with
a realistic load dataset. The simulation demonstrates the balance
between unlearning completeness and operational cost.
Index Terms —Data privacy and security, load forecasting,
machine unlearning, end-to-end learning, power system operation,
inﬂuence function.
NOMENCLA TURE
Abbreviations:
CNN Convolutional Neural Network.
MAPE Mean Absolute Percentage Error.
MLP Multi Layer Perceptron.
MSE Mean Squared Error.
NN Neural Network.
PA/TA-MU Performance/Task Aware Machine
Unlearning.
SO System Operator.
Machine Unlearning:
θ⋆,θ⋆
mod,θ⋆
remain Optimal Model Parameters.
Manuscript received 4 September 2023; revised 21 January 2024; accepted
8 March 2024. Date of publication 13 March 2024; date of current version
29 October 2024. Paper no. TPWRS-01388-2023. (Corresponding author: Fei
Teng.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic En-
gineering, Imperial College London, SW7 2BX London, U.K. (e-mail:
f.teng@imperial.ac.uk).
All codes can be found at https://github.com/xuwkk/task_aware_machine_
unlearning.
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2024.3376828.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2024.3376828
f (·;θ) Load forecast model.
yi, ˆyi Ground-truth and forecast load of
thei-th sample.
ℓi(·), ℓi
test(·) Training and test loss/criterion of the
i-th sample.
ϵi Weight on the i-th sample.
λ1, λ∞ 1-norm and inf-norm limits on the
sample weights variation.
D, Dtest, Dunlearn,Dremain Training, test, unlearn, and remain
dataset.
L(·), Ltest(·) Training and test cost function.
N , Ntest Size of training and test dataset.
Power System Operation:
Pg ,Pls,Pgs V ector of generator set-points, load
sheddings, and energy storages.
Qg ,cg Second and ﬁrst order coefﬁcient of
the generator cost.
cgs2,cgs Second and ﬁrst order coefﬁcient of
energy storage.
cls2, cls Second and ﬁrst order coefﬁcient of
load shedding.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Data Privacy and Security in Load F orecasting
A
CCURA TE load forecasting is essential for the secu-
rity and economic operation of the power system. The
deterministic [1] and probabilistic [2] methods are two main
categories. Recently, machine and deep learning algorithms
have been widely applied to better retrieve spatial and temporal
information, which certainly beneﬁt the progression of load
forecasting [3]. To fulﬁll the training purpose, large amount of
data is collected from individuals, which challenges the integrity
of data ownership and security.
In power system, the system operator (SO) collects and trans-
fers individual data for various operational purposes. However,
this arrangement has raised privacy concerns, as individual
load data are sensitive and can be targeted to retrace personal
identity and behavior [4]. From the perspective of data security,
data collected from unsecured sources are prone to errors and
adversaries. For example, the authors of[5] benchmark how poor
training data could degrade forecast accuracy by introducing
random noise. Furthermore, data poisoning attack is speciﬁcally
designed to contaminate the training dataset to prevent the load
forecaster from being accurate at the test stage [6].
0885-8950 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XU AND TENG: TASK-AW ARE MACHINE UNLEARNING AND ITS APPLICA TION IN LOAD FORECASTING 7179
Most of the existing work designs a preventive training algo-
rithm to address concerns about data privacy and security. For
example, federated learning is studied, in which each training
participant only shares the trained parameters with the cen-
tral server [7].I n [8], a fully distributed training framework
has been proposed in which each participant only shares the
parameters with his neighbors. Differential privacy is another
privacy-preserving technique used for load forecasting to avoid
identifying the individual [9]. To combat poisoning attack, fed-
erated learning enhanced with differential privacy is developed
in [10]. By weight-clipping and adding noise to the central
parameter update, the global model can be resistant to inference
attacks to some extent. In addition, gradient quantization is
applied, where each participant only uploads the sign of the
local gradient [11].
B. Machine Unlearning
However, training stage prevention is not sufﬁcient when
the post-action of removing the impact of those data from the
trained forecaster is needed. From privacy concerns, in addition
to the right to share the data, many national and regional regu-
lations have certiﬁed the consumers’ ‘right to forget’ [12], such
as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and the recent US’s California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA). That is, consumers are eligible to request to destroy
their personal records at any stage of the service, including the
encoded information in the trained model [13]. Meanwhile, the
SO may not be aware of the data defect until the model has been
trained and deployed. Obviously, a straightforward approach to
removing the impact of part of the dataset is to retrain the model
from scratch on the remaining data. However, retraining can be
computationally expensive and sometimes infeasible due to the
lack of the original dataset.
In this context, machine unlearning (MU) has been introduced
in machine learning especially the computer vision community
to study the problem of removing a subset of training data, the
forget or unlearn dataset, from the trained model. It has recently
been extended to other practical ﬁelds, such as removing bias in
language models [14], unlearning personal information on the
Internet of Things [15] and digital twin mobile networks [16],a s
well as removing malicious samples in wireless communication
beam selection problems [17].
Originating from [18] for statistical query learning, MU can
be broadly classiﬁed into exact and approximate unlearning.
Exact unlearnings are developed for speciﬁc algorithms, such
as k-means [19] and modiﬁed random forest [20]. The gradient
and the Hessian matrix of the training objective are useful to
approximate the inﬂuence of samples on the parameters of the
trained model. Therefore, the Fisher information [21], [22] and
the inﬂuence function [23], [24], [25] are adopted to unlearn
the inﬂuence of the forget dataset from the trained model.
Motivated by differential privacy, [25] certiﬁes the exactness
of data removal in linear classiﬁers. However, these methods
are difﬁcult to generalize to the neural network (NN) [26] with
guaranteed unlearning performance. To overcome the problem, a
mixed-privacy forgetting is proposed to only unlearn on a linear
TABLE I
PURPOSES OF UNLEARNING
regression model around the trained NN [24], [25]. Projected
gradient unlearning is proposed in [27]. The gradient orthogonal
to the column space of gradients of the remaining dataset is
adopted to incrementally unlearn the forget dataset without
catastrophically forgetting the remaining dataset.
Another line of research assumes that the model is trained with
an oracle, that is, by taking into account the future unlearning
requirement during training. For example, amnesiac training
tracks the contribution of each training batch. When data in a
batch is requested to be removed, the batch contribution can
simply be subtracted [28]. Alternatively, an exact but efﬁcient
retraining algorithm is proposed in [29] in which ensemble
models are trained on disjoint subsets of data. Therefore, only
the model trained on the unlearned dataset needs to be re-trained.
However, when the forget dataset spreads over multiple models,
this method becomes less efﬁcient. Finally, the theorem and
application of machine unlearning are continually studied and
more information can be found in the recent review [30].
C. Research Gaps
1) Unlearning Completeness vs Model Performance: Al-
though retraining is usually not a viable option, it is broadly
agreed that the golden rule for unlearning is to minimize the
distance between unlearnt and retrained models[30]. In addition,
the unlearning algorithm is complete if the unlearnt model
is identical to the model re-trained on the remaining dataset.
However, we argue that complete unlearning may not be suitable
for power system applications. Referring to Table I, when the
privacy is mainly concerned ( privacy-driven MU ), although
complete unlearning can certainly remove the inﬂuence of the
forget dataset, it can inevitably degrade the performance of the
trained model so that the interest of the remaining customers is
harmed [13].F o rt h e security-driven MU , the malicious data
can still contain useful information. However, the complete
unlearning not only removes the adverse inﬂuence of the forget
dataset, but also the useful one.
Therefore, under both privacy and security concerns, machine
unlearning is to eliminate the inﬂuence of the data from the
load forecaster while considering the possible inﬂuence on the
model performance. We model this dilemma as a trade-off be-
tween unlearning completeness and model performance.H o wt o
quantitatively calculate the two factors effectively and efﬁciently
without knowing the re-trained model needs to be investigated.
2) Physical Meaning of Power System: Apart from the com-
pleteness and performance trade-off, directly applying the MU
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
7180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 39, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Fig. 1. Workﬂow of machine unlearning. The data removal request can be
made by privacy and security concerns. An unlearning algorithm is developed to
update the forecaster with the role of power system operation being considered.
algorithms from machine learning community overlooks the
physical meaning of power system. In load forecasting, the
ultimate goal is to use the forecast load for downstream tasks,
such as dispatching the generator. As shown in [31], [32],
[33], the forecast error mismatches the generator cost deviation
such that a highly accurate load forecaster may not result in
economic power system operation. Intuitively, we argue that the
performance of MU also deviates from the accuracy criterion to
the task-aware generator cost. Therefore, the cost of generator
needs to be evaluated as the performance criterion when dealing
with the completeness-performance trade-off.
D. Contributions
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
r Machine Unlearning: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
paper applying machine unlearning to power system appli-
cations. Speciﬁcally, we introduce machine unlearning to
the load forecasting model (shown by Fig.1). The inﬂuence
of forget dataset on the trained model is evaluated by
inﬂuence function-based approach, which is eliminated by
Newton’s update.
r Completeness-Performance Trade-off:We show that com-
plete unlearning can inevitably inﬂuence statistical perfor-
mance of the load forecaster, such as MSE and MAPE. To
overcome the dilemma, the inﬂuence function is used to
quantify the impact on the statistical performance of each
sample, which allows reweighting the remaining dataset
through optimization and improving performance through
performance-aware machine unlearning (PAMU).
r Task-aware Machine Unlearning:Finally, we demonstrate
that statistical performance cannot reﬂect the ultimate goal
of power system operation, such as minimizing the cost
of generator dispatch. Therefore, a task-aware machine
unlearning (TAMU) is proposed by formulating the un-
learning objective as a trilevel optimization. We theoreti-
cally prove the existence of the gradient of such task-aware
objective, which is key to sample re-weighting.
II. M ACHINE UNLEARNING FOR LOAD FORECASTING
A. Parametric Load F orecasting Model
In this paper, we consider the load forecasting problem withn
loads/participants. Given dataset D = {(xi,yi)}N
i=1.L e txi ∈
Rn×M be the feature matrix, i.e., each load has feature of length
M , andyi ∈Rn be the ground truth load. A parametric forecast
modelf (·;θ): Rn×M × RP → Rn can be trained as
θ⋆ =a r g m i n
θ
L(θ)=a r g m i n
θ
1
N
N∑
i=1
ℓ(f (xi;θ),yi) (1)
where L(θ) is the training loss. For simplicity, denote
ℓ(f (xi;θ),yi) as ℓi(θ) as the loss on the i-th sample. MSE is
commonly used as the training loss by assuming that the forecast
error follows Gaussian distribution, i.e., ℓi(θ)= ∥f (xi;θ)−
yi∥2
2.
In addition to the training dataset D, there is a test dataset
Dtest on which a test criterion can be evaluated on:
Ltest(θ⋆)= 1
Ntest
Ntest∑
i=1
ℓi
test(θ⋆) (2)
The test criterion ℓi
test(θ) can be different from the training loss
ℓi(θ). For instance, the load forecasting model can be trained
with MSE loss but is usually evaluated by MAPE, etc. In this
paper, we call the loss/criterion such as MSE and MAPE as
statistical(-driven) loss/criterion.
B. Inﬂuence Function
The inﬂuence function deﬁnes a second-order method to eval-
uate parameter changes when training samples are up-weighted
by a small amount[34]. Deﬁne a sub-datasetDup ⊆D. For every
sample j ∈Dup up-weighted by ϵj , the new objective function
can be written as
θ⋆
mod =a r g m i n
θ
Lmod(θ)
=a r g m i n
θ
1
N
∑
i∈D
ℓi(θ)
  
L(θ)
+ 1
N
∑
j∈Dup
ϵjℓj (θ)
  
Lup (θ)
(3)
The ﬁrst-order optimality condition gives that
∇Lmod(θ⋆
mod)= 0 (4)
Apply the ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion around θ⋆ on (4):
∇Lmod(θ⋆)+ ∇2Lmod(θ⋆)(θ⋆
mod −θ⋆) ∼= 0
Consequently, up-weighting samples in Dup can approximately
result in parameter changes
θ⋆
mod −θ⋆ ∼= −
(
∇2Lmod(θ⋆)
)−1
∇Lmod(θ⋆) (5)
Furthermore, since ∇L(θ⋆)= 0, ∇Lmod(θ⋆)= ∇Lup(θ⋆).
Equation (5) can be rewritten as
θ⋆
mod −θ⋆ ∼= −
(
∇2Lmod(θ⋆)
)−1
∇Lup(θ⋆) (6)
Whenϵj is small and/or|Dup|≪| D |,∇2Lmod(θ⋆) ∼= ∇2L(θ⋆).
Therefore, (6) is further approximated as
θ⋆
mod −θ⋆ ∼= −
(
∇2L(θ⋆)
)−1
∇Lup(θ⋆) (7)
where ∇Lup(θ⋆)= 1
N
∑
j∈Dup ϵj∇ℓj (θ⋆) and ∇2L(θ⋆)=
1
N
∑
j∈D∇2ℓj (θ⋆).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XU AND TENG: TASK-AW ARE MACHINE UNLEARNING AND ITS APPLICA TION IN LOAD FORECASTING 7181
We highlight that (5)–(7) are Newton’s update on the param-
eter with respect to the new objective (3). Therefore, for the
multivariate linear load forecaster with MSE loss, (5) and (6)
are exact updates on the trained model θ⋆.
C. Machine Unlearning Algorithm
From a data privacy perspective, participants are eligible to
ask the SO to remove their data and inﬂuence on the trained
modelθ⋆. When a request is made on recordj, the corresponding
datum (xj,yj ) needs to be removed from the training dataset.
Meanwhile, D can contain erroneous or malicious data, caused
by improper data collection or poisoning attacks, whose inﬂu-
ence on the trained forecaster needs to be removed as well.
Deﬁne Dunlearn ⊂D as the dataset that needs to be re-
moved and|Dunlearn|≪| D |. The remaining dataset is denoted as
Dremain = D\D unlearn. A commonly used MU algorithm can be
directly derived from the inﬂuence function by setting ϵj = −1
in (3). As a result, (5) can be modiﬁed as
θ⋆
remain ∼= θ⋆ −
( ∑
i∈Dremain
∇2ℓi(θ⋆)
)−1 ∑
i∈Dremain
∇ℓi(θ⋆) (8)
For a linear forecaster, unlearning (8) is complete as it is
guaranteed to converge atθ⋆
remain, the model retrained byDremain.
Similar unlearning algorithms can also be derived from (6) and
(7).
III. P ERFORMANCE-AWA R EMACHINE UNLEARNING
A complete MU algorithm on linear load forecaster such as
(8) can inevitably inﬂuence the performance of the test dataset
(will be shown in the simulation). Following the previous work
in [35], a performance-aware machine unlearning (PAMU) is
derived by re-weighting the remaining samples based on their
distinct contribution to the statistic criterion (2).
To start, the inﬂuence function (7) can be further extended
to assess the performance change of the test set due to the up-
weighted objective (3) [26], [36]. The performance on the test
dataset for model parameterized by θ⋆
remain can be written as
Ltest(θ⋆
remain)= 1
Ntest
Ntest∑
i=1
ℓi
test(θ⋆
remain) (9)
Applying ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion on (9) gives:
Ltest(θ⋆
remain)
∼= 1
Ntest
Ntest∑
i=1
ℓi
test(θ⋆)
  
Ltest (θ⋆ )
+ 1
Ntest
Ntest∑
i=1
∇ℓi
test(θ⋆)T (θ⋆
remain −θ⋆)
(10)
To eliminate the performance change(10), the remaining dataset
can be re-weighted. The idea is straightforwardly that, after
unlearning, different remaining samples will have different in-
ﬂuence on the performance, which needs to be re-weighted as if
they are being re-trained.
The new objective function on the re-weighted remaining
dataset can be written as
θ⋆
remain,ϵ =a r g m i n
θ
1
N
∑
i∈Dremain
ϵiℓi(θ) (11)
where ϵi is an unknown weight for sample i in the remaining
dataset. Referring to (5), the parameter changes can be approx-
imated as
θ⋆
remain,ϵ −θ⋆ ∼= −
( ∑
i∈Dremain
ϵi∇2ℓi(θ⋆)
)−1 ∑
i∈Dremain
ϵi∇ℓi(θ⋆)
(12)
Plugging (12) into (10), the performance changes can be written
as:
Ltest(θ⋆
remain,ϵ)−Ltest(θ⋆) ∼= mT ∑
i∈Dremain
ϵi∇ℓi(θ⋆) (13)
where
mT = − 1
Ntest
∑
i∈Dtest
∇ℓi
test(θ⋆)T
( ∑
i∈Dremain
ϵi∇2ℓi(θ⋆)
)−1
(14)
Whenϵi is close to 1, the m vector can be approximated as
˜mT = − 1
Ntest
∑
i∈Dtest
∇ℓi
test(θ⋆)T
( ∑
i∈Dremain
∇2ℓi(θ⋆)
)−1
(15)
Our goal is to ﬁnd an optimal weights to improve the test
set performance, which can be formulated as a constrained
optimization problem:
ϵ⋆ =a r g m i n
ϵ
˜mT ∑
i∈Dremain
ϵi∇ℓi(θ⋆)
s.t. 1
Nremain
∥ϵ−1∥1 ≤λ1, ∥ϵ−1∥∞ ≤λ∞
(16)
where ϵ ∈R|Dremain| and1 ∈R|Dremain|.
In (16), the weights of the remaining samples are optimized
so that the inﬂuence of forgetting Dunlearn is reduced. Since the
ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion (10) is a local approximation, the
1-norm and inf-norm constraints are added to control aggregated
and individual re-weighting. When λ1 → 0 or λ∞ → 0,ϵ → 1,
representing complete machine unlearning (8). When λ1 and
λ∞ become larger, the performance of the test dataset improves,
while the completeness of the unlearning is reduced. Therefore,
by controlling λ1 and λ∞, the trade-off between MU complete-
ness and performance changes can be balanced.
Since both ˜m and ∇ℓi(θ)⋆,i ∈Dremain are calculated in
advance, (16) is a convex optimization problem that can be
easily solved. Once the optimal weightsϵ⋆ are optimized, we can
unlearnDunlearn through (12). Regarding different choices ofℓtest,
e.g. MSE and MAPE, the remaining dataset can be reweighted
in distinct manners. In addition, it is also possible to integrate
different criteria.
Furthermore, compared to [35], the objective of (16) does not
take the absolute value. Therefore, the objective of (16) can be
negative and it is allowed to improve performance beyond the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
7182 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 39, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
originally trained model. Any uncovered biased data in Dremain
will be assigned a smaller weight, and unlearning becomes a
one-step continual learning on the re-weighted samples. Re-
weighting the samples to improve the model performance has
been used in other load forecasting algorithm [37]. However,
we directly ﬁnd the suitable weights on the trained parameter
θ⋆ through an optimization problem (16) and update the model
using the second-order approach (12).
IV . TASK-AWA R EMACHINE UNLEARNING
A. F ormulation and Algorithm
In power systems, the forecast load is further used to schedule
generators, and the statistic accuracy of the forecast load is
eventually converted into the deviation of the generator cost,
which is strongly linked to the value of each sample as well as
the proﬁt of the SO and participants. As a result, PAMU guided
by the statistic-driven criterion may not reﬂect on the ultimate
goal of power system operation, and a further step on PAMU
is needed to balance the generator cost, which can be done by
taking the generator cost as the new test criterion.
To measure the impact of model parameterθon the operation
cost, the following task-aware criterion Lgen(θ) can be formu-
lated:
min
θ
1
Ntest
Ntest∑
i=1
ℓi
gen(θ)
s.t.
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(Re-dispatch):
(Pi⋆
ls,Pi⋆
gs ) ∈arg min{cls2∥Pi
ls∥2
2 +cgs2∥Pi
gs∥2
2
+cls∥Pi
ls∥1 +cgs∥Pi
gs∥1 :
(Pi
ls,Pi
gs ) ∈Credispatch(Pi⋆
g ,yi)}
(Dispatch):
Pi⋆
g ∈arg min{PiT
g QgPi
g +cT
g Pi
g +cls∥si∥1 :
(Pi
g,si) ∈Cdispatch(ˆyi)}
(Forecast):
ˆyi = f (xi;θ)
for all i =1 ,..., |Dtest| (17)
Detailed formulations can be found in Appendix A.T h et a s k -
aware criterion (17) can be viewed as a trilevel optimization
problem with two lower levels, taking the expectation over the
test dataset. For each sample, the lower level one is a dispatch
problem that minimizes the generator cost subject to the system
operation constraintCdispatch.Pg is the generator dispatch. Lower
level two is a re-dispatch problem which aims to balance any
under- or over-generation due to inaccurate forecast through load
shedding Pls and generation storage Pgs , under the constraint
set Credispatch. The upper level, which represents the expected
operation cost, can be determined as the integration of the two
stages:
ℓgen(Pg,Pls,Pgs ;θ)
= PT
g QgPg +cls2∥Pls∥2
2 +cgs2∥Pgs∥2
2
+cT
g Pg +cls1∥Pls∥1 +cgs1∥Pgs∥1
(18)
Fig. 2. Structure of tri-level optimization (17) viewed as layers in the forward
pass. The gradients used in (20) are highlighted in red.
When θis ﬁxed and if each lower-level problem has a unique
optimum, (17) is the expected real-time power system operation
cost on the test dataset.
Referring to (10), to evaluate the inﬂuence on the generator
cost, the gradient∇ℓi
gen(θ⋆) needs to be calculated, which seems
to be a problem due to the nested structure and constraints in
(17). To solve the problem, ﬁrstly, for each sample i,i tc a n
be observed that the lower level problems are sequentially con-
nected, that is, the input to stage one problem is the forecast load
while the input to stage two problem is the generator dispatch
status from stage one. Second, the lower-level problems are also
independent among samples and the constraints. Therefore, the
lower-level optimizations can be viewed as composite function
for each sample. Let Pi
g = p⋆
1(ˆyi) and Pi
ls,gs = p⋆
2(Pi
g,yi)
be the optimal solution map for dispatch and re-dispatch, the
individual generator cost (18) can be written as a composite
function:
ℓi
gen(θ⋆)= ℓi
gen(p⋆
1(ˆyi),p⋆
2(p⋆
1(ˆyi),yi)) (19)
Alternatively, we can view the lower-level optimizations as se-
quential layers upon the parametric forecasting model. The layer,
which represents a constrained optimization problem, is named
as differentiable convex layer[38]. Consequently, TAMU can be
achieved by replacing the statistic metric ℓi
test(θ⋆) by ℓi
gen(θ⋆),
followed by ﬁnding the weights of the remaining dataset (16)
and updating the parameters by (12).
The last issue that needs to be resolved is to calculate the
gradient of (19) as required by (10). From the chain rule, the
gradient of (19) can be written as:
∂ℓi
gen(θ⋆)
∂θ
=
(
∂ℓi
gen(Pi
g,Pi
ls,gs )
∂Pg
+
∂ℓi
gen(Pi
g,Pi
ls,gs )
∂Pls,gs
∂p⋆
2(Pi
g )
∂Pg
)
× ∂p⋆
1(ˆyi)
∂ˆy
∂f (θ⋆)
∂θ (20)
with the gradient ﬂow highlighted in Fig. 2.I n (20), the gradient
∂ℓi
gen(θ⋆)/∂θexists if the gradients through the differentiable
convex layers, namely ∂p⋆
1(ˆyi)/∂ˆy and ∂p⋆
2(Pi
g )/∂Pg ,e x i s t ,
which is fulﬁlled under some assumptions in the following
proposition.
Proposition 1: The gradients ∂p⋆
1(ˆyi)/∂ˆy and ∂p⋆
2(Pi
g )/
∂Pg exist, which do not depend on ˆyi and Pi
g , respectively, if
1).Q is positive deﬁnite,cls2 andcgs2 are positive; and 2). The
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XU AND TENG: TASK-AW ARE MACHINE UNLEARNING AND ITS APPLICA TION IN LOAD FORECASTING 7183
Fig. 3. Structure of NN based load forecaster and feature extractor. All the
layers except for the Flatten Layer and the Linear Layer 2 contain activations.
linear independent constraint qualiﬁcation (LICQ) is satisﬁed at
the optimum of each of the lower-level problems.
The proof can be found in Appendix B.
B. Extension to Neural Network Based Load F orecaster
The unlearning algorithm (8) is complete on the linear load
forecaster as the training objective is quadratic. However, this
condition is usually not satisﬁed for neural networks. In the
meantime, its Hessian can be singular due to early stop of train-
ing. This makes the inﬂuence function approximate poorly to the
parameter and performance changes [26], and it becomes harder
to evaluate the trade-off between unlearning completeness and
model performance in PAMU and TAMU.
To address this problem, we assume that there exists a load
forecasting model which is not trained by the consumers’ data
in the service provided by SO. The model can be a pre-trained
model which is publicly available or can be trained on historic
non-sensitive data by the SO. Using the idea of transfer learn-
ing [39], the SO can then use the pre-trained load forecaster as a
deep feature extractor and use the consumers’ data to ﬁne tune
the last layer. Therefore, only the last layer needs to be unlearnt.
Practically, we ﬁrst divide the training dataset into pre-trained
and user-sensitive data as Dpre and Dsen, respectively, with
Dpre ∩Dsen = ∅. The pre-trained data is assumed to be collected
neutrally, which does not violate any participant’s privacy and
is error-free, while the user-sensitive data may not be. We then
pre-train a load forecaster on the Dpre using regular stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), and the trained model (except for the
last layer) can be used as a deep feature extractor f (·;θ⋆
FE).A s
illustrated in Fig. 3,Dsen is further used to ﬁne-tune Linear Layer
2 by the MSE loss. Since using a stochastic gradient method can
introduce uncertainties, we propose to ﬁne-tune the last layer
analytically on Dsen according to the following proposition.
Proposition 2: The optimization problem of minimizing the
MSE loss on a linear layer without activations is quadratic and
has unique minimizer if the extracted features from f (·;θ⋆
FE)
are linearly independent.
The proof can be found in Appendix C.
According to Proposition 2, ReLU activation cannot be used
in Linear Layer 1 as it can result in trivial output when the
extracted features are negative for some of the samples in the
remaining dataset. When an unlearning is requested, the same
unlearning algorithms developed previously can be applied on
Linear Layer 2 alone and MU (8) is complete. Since the feature
extractor trains only on the pre-train data, it does not contain
sensitive information that needs to be unlearnt.
C. Computations
In this section, we discuss some computational issues and
some useful open-source packages for the developed unlearning
algorithms.
1) Inversion of Hessian: Machine unlearning (8) and calcu-
lation of vector ˜m in PAMU and TAMU require matrix inversion
of the Hessian matrix. In general, second-order differentiation
on training loss is time consuming, as storing and inverting the
Hessian matrix requires O(d3) operations, where d represents
the number of parameters in the load forecast model. Using ˜m
(15) as a example:
˜mT = − 1
Ntest
Ntest∑
i=1
∇ℓi
test(θ⋆)T
  
vT ∈R1×d
( ∑
i∈Dremain
∇2ℓi(θ⋆)
)−1
  
H−1∈Rd×d
(21)
Calculating ˜m can be reduced to solve a linear system:
H · ˜m = v (22)
The conjugate gradient (CG) descent algorithm can be applied
to solve (22) up tod iterations. We also apply the Hessian vector
product (HVP) [40] to directly calculate H ˜mk for the k-th
iteration in CG so that the Hessian matrix will never be ex-
plicitly calculated and stored. HVP is computationally efﬁcient
as it only requires one modiﬁed forward and backward pass.
Similarly, to implement PAMU or TAMU, we can modify the
objective directly into the sum of training loss weighted by ϵ⋆
from (16) and implement the same CG and HVP procedure.
We implement these functionalities using a modiﬁed version of
Torch-Influence package [26].
2) Differentiable Convex Layer: In TAMU, the gradient of
generator cost (20) can be analytically written according to
Proposition 3 in Appendix B. It also requires the forward pass to
solve the dispatch and re-dispatch problems. In the simulation,
we model the operation problems and (16) by Cvxpy [41].
When calculating the gradient, we use PyTorch automatic
differentiation package and CvxpyLayers [38] to implement
fast batched forward and backward passes.
V. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Simulation Settings
We use an open-source dataset from the Texas Backbone
Power System [42] which includes meteorological and calendar
features and loads in 2019 with a resolution of one hour. The
dispatch and re-dispatch problems are solved on a modiﬁed IEEE
bus-14 system to demonstrate the proposed algorithms. Three
parametric load forecasting models, namely multivariate linear
regression, convolutional neural network (CNN), and MLP-
Mixer [43], are trained by MSE loss. Detailed experimental
settings can be found in Appendix D.
B. Unlearning Performance on the Linear Model
1) Unlearning Performance: Unlearning performances on
the linear load forecasting model under various unlearning
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
7184 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 39, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Fig. 4. Performance of complete machine unlearning algorithm (8) on remain (blue), unlearn (red) and test dataset (green) of the linear load forecaster. The
dotted curves report the performance of the original model and the solid curves are the performance of the unlearnt model.
Fig. 5. Relationship on the inﬂuences of MSE, MAPE, and Cost criteria on the test dataset from the samples in remain dataset. The r values are Pearson correlation
coefﬁcients.
criteria are summarized in Fig. 4. We have veriﬁed that the un-
learning algorithm (8) results in the same updated parameter as
the one re-trained on the remaining dataset under all unlearning
rates.
Note that the dotted curves, which represent the performance
of the original model, only slightly change over the various
unlearning ratios. Broadly speaking, the performance gaps be-
tween the unlearnt and original models becomes larger as the
unlearning ratio increases. Especially, all the performance cri-
teria on the test dataset become worse when the unlearning pro-
portion increases, which veriﬁes the statement that unlearning
can inevitably degrade the generalization ability of the trained
model. For instance, the generator cost can increase by 20%
when 20% of the training data are unlearnt. In contrast, the
performance of the remain dataset improves as the unlearning
ratio increases. This is because when the original model is
unlearnt, the model parameters are updated and ﬁtted more on
the remaining dataset. Moreover, it can be observed that the
trends of performance changes of the unlearnt model are distinct
for different criterion. In detail, the generator cost (Fig. 4(c))
diverges more signiﬁcantly from the original model, compared
to MSE and MAPE.
2) Performance Sensitivity Analysis: For each sample in the
remaining dataset, we can calculate its inﬂuence on the expected
performance of the test dataset. The remaining dataset is chosen
as it is re-weighted by PAMU and TAMU. For i ∈Dremain,t h e
inﬂuence can be found by (13) and (15) with ϵi =1 , i.e.,
Ii
test
= − 1
Ntest
∑
j∈Dtest
∇ℓj
test(θ⋆)T
⎛
⎝ ∑
j∈Dremain
∇2ℓj (θ⋆)
⎞
⎠
−1
∇ℓi(θ⋆)
(23)
where the test loss ℓtest(·) can be MSE, MAPE or Cost (19).
To visualize the relationship among these criteria, we randomly
draw 1 k samples with equal size of under- and over-generation
cases from the remaining dataset. For each sample, the under-
generation means that the sum of the forecast loads is lower
than the sum of the ground-truth load, and the over-generation
is opposite. The relationships of any two of the criteria are
illustrated in Fig. 5 with associated Pearson correlation coefﬁ-
cients (the r value) calculated. Since the performance changes
are modeled linearly by ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion (10) and
the objective of re-weighting optimization is also linear (16),
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is a suitable indicator of the linear
relationship. Using MSE and MAPE as an example, the Pearson
correlation coefﬁcient is deﬁned as
rMSE,MAPE =
∑
i(Ii
MSE −¯IMSE)(Ii
MAPE −¯IMAPE)√∑
i(Ii
MSE −¯IMSE)2
√∑
i(Ii
MAPE −¯IMAPE)2
(24)
where ¯IMSE and ¯IMAPE are the average of MSE and MAPE
inﬂuence, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XU AND TENG: TASK-AW ARE MACHINE UNLEARNING AND ITS APPLICA TION IN LOAD FORECASTING 7185
Fig. 6. Performance of PAMU and TAMU with different test criteria. a), b), and c) are performances on the test dataset evaluated by MSE, MAPE, and averag e
generator cost, respectively. The performance of the original model and the model unlearnt by complete unlearning (8) are represented by the black and orange
lines, respectively.
In Fig. 5, positive sensitivity represents the degradation of per-
formance after unlearning such sample. That is, after this sample
is unlearnt, the MSE, MAPE, or average generator cost on
test dataset increases. First, the Pearson correlation coefﬁcients
have clearly demonstrated that there exists a strong positive
linear relationship between the two statistic criteria (0.829),
while this relationship is insigniﬁcant between the statistic and
task-aware criteria (0.073 between MSE and Cost and −0.480
between MAPE and Cost). These distinct relationships imply
that balancing performance by one statistical criterion is likely
effective on the other. In contrast, balancing the performance
by statistical criteria can unlikely be effective on the generator
cost and vice versa. Secondly, as the under-generation is more
costly than the over-generation, unlearning an under-generation
sample tends to reduce the overall generator cost with negative
sensitivities. As shown by Fig. 5(b) and 5(c), if the sensitivities
are projected to the y-axis, most of the negative sensitivities
are contributed by the under-generation samples, which veriﬁes
our intuition. However, it does not occur in MSE and MAPE
as they are almost centrally symmetric around the origin in
Fig. 5(a).
The above discussions can verify the intuition that the statistic
performance cannot reﬂect and may even conﬂict with the task-
aware operation cost.
3) Performances of PAMU and TAMU: The performance of
PAMU and TAMU on the test dataset is reported in Fig. 6 in
which 25% training data is removed. To balance the trade-off,
λ1 is varied and the inf-norm constraint λ∞ in (16) is set as
1. That is, the weight of a remaining sample can very from
0 to 2. First, unlearning by balancing one of the criteria can
effectively maintain the performance of the same criterion (e.g.,
red curve in Fig. 6(a), blue curve in Fig. 6(b), and green curve
in Fig. 6(c)). When λ1 approaches 0, the PAMU and TAMU
become complete with the same performance as the retrained
model in all criteria, as no samples can be re-weighted. When
λ1 increases, the performance of the original model is recovered
and the divergence to the retrained model increases. After λ1 is
further increased, better performance is achieved, resulting in a
new type of continual learning through sample re-weighting. As
a result, the proposed PAMU and TAMU can effectively balance
the completeness and performance trade-off in MU by changing
λ1. In addition, Fig. 7 illustrates the parameter difference to the
retrained model (evaluated by 2-norm) vs the generator cost,
which clearly demonstrates the trade-off as well.
Fig. 7. Trade-off between MU completeness and the operation cost.
Meanwhile, it is observed that the cost curves perform differ-
ently compared to the MSE and MAPE curves. When balancing
the cost, both MSE and MAPE get worse. In contrast, balancing
the MSE can also keep/improve the MAPE performance to some
extent, and vice versa. This observation is in line with the analy-
sis on the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient in the previous section.
C. Unlearning Performance on the NN F orecaster
Since the ﬁne-tuning objective on Dsen is quadratic (by
Proposition 2), the direct unlearning is also complete for the NN
load forecaster. We can expect that the unlearning behaviors are
similar to the linear counterpart. Therefore, we only highlight
some of the simulation results and leave details in Appendix E.
Similarly to the linear counterpart, unlearning part of the train-
ing dataset can deteriorate the performance of the test set.
The performance-aware unlearning algorithm can effectively
balance the unlearning completeness and model performance,
which is more effective on the criterion it is evaluated on.
However, instead of having opposite statistical and cost trends
in Fig. 6, all criteria are improved with decay speed. This is
because the NN-based load forecaster is more accurate than the
linear counterpart, resulting in a less signiﬁcant misalignment
between the load forecast accuracy and the generator cost.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces machine unlearning algorithm for load
forecasting model to eliminate the inﬂuence of data that is
adversarial or contains sensitive information of individuals. The
inﬂuence function provides a theoretical foundation that is fur-
ther used to evaluate the impact of unlearning on the performance
of the test dataset. A performance aware machine unlearning
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
7186 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 39, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
is proposed by re-weighting the remaining dataset. To handle
the divergence between statistical and task-aware criteria, we
propose task-aware machine unlearning. The simulation results
verify that the proposed task-aware algorithm can signiﬁcantly
reduce the generator cost on the test dataset by compensating
for the unlearning completeness.
APPENDIX
A. Power System Operation Models
In the US, the following network constrained economic dis-
patch (NCED) problem is widely adopted [44]. Given the fore-
cast load ˆy on each bus,
(P⋆
g,ϑ⋆,s⋆)= a r g m i n
Pg,ϑ,s
PT
g QgPg +cT
g Pg +cls∥s∥1
s.t. Pg ≤Pg ≤ ¯Pg
B busϑ= CgPg −Cl(ˆy −s)
Pf ≤Bfϑ≤ ¯Pf
s ≥0, ϑref =0
In the dispatch problem, a quadratic generator cost is adopted.
In addition, Bbus and Bf are the bus susceptance and branch
succeptance matrices, respectively.Cg andCl are the generator
and load incidence matrices, respectively. A slack variables ≥0
with large cost cls is introduced to ensure feasibility.
After the generators are scheduled, any over- and/or under-
generations are penalized when the actual load y is realized
in real time. In detail, given P⋆
g , we consider the following
optimization problem modiﬁed from [45]:
(P⋆
ls,P⋆
gs,ϑ⋆)= a r g m i n
Pls,Pgs,ϑ
cls2∥Pls∥2
2 +cgs2∥Pgs∥2
2
+cls1∥Pls∥1 +cgs1∥Pgs∥1
s.t. B busϑ= Cg (P⋆
g −Pgs )−Cl(y −Pls)
Pf ≤Bfϑ≤ ¯Pf
Pls ≥0, Pgs ≥0, ϑref =0
wherePls andPgs are the load shedding and generation storage.
The second-order costcgs2 <c ls2 and linear costcgs1 <c ls1 are
set to penalize more on the load shedding.
B. Proof to Proposition 1
We prove Proposition 1 by proving a more general Proposi-
tion 3. To start, consider the following QP:
x⋆ =a r g m i n
x
1
2xTQx +qTx
s.t. Ax +b +g(z) ≤0
Cx +d +h(z)= 0 (A.1)
wherex ∈Rn,Q ∈Rn×n,q ∈Rn,A ∈Rm×n,b ∈Rm,C ∈
Rp×n, d ∈Rp, and z ∈Rq . g : Rq → Rm and h : Rq → Rp
are functions on z, representing the perturbation parameters.
Apart from the linear parametric inequality constraints in (17),
we also include the linear parametric termg(z) in the inequality
constraint for generalization purposes (and it also gives the same
conclusion to Proposition 1). We call (A.1) afﬁne-parametric,
since the parametric terms g(z) and h(z) are afﬁne in the
inequality and equality constraints.
Proposition 3: Given an afﬁne parametric QP (A.1), the opti-
mal primal and dual pair (x⋆, λ⋆,ν⋆) is an afﬁne function of the
parameter (g(z),h(z)) if 1). Q is positive deﬁnite; and 2). the
linear independent constraint qualiﬁcation (LICQ) is satisﬁed at
(x⋆, λ⋆,ν⋆).
Proof: First, the LICQ states that the gradient of the active
constraints (including all equality constraints and active inequal-
ity constraints) are linearly independent [46]. Therefore, C is
full row rank. Second, the equality Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT)
conditions [46] can be denoted as:
G(x⋆, λ⋆,ν⋆,z)=
⎛
⎝
Qx⋆ +q +AT λ⋆ +CTν⋆
diag(λ⋆)(Ax⋆ +b +g(z))
Cx⋆ +d +h(z)
⎞
⎠ = 0
We divide the proofs by the existence of active constraints.
When there are no active inequality constraints, λ⋆ =
0 due to complementary slackness. Since Q is positive
deﬁnite, the stationary condition gives x⋆ = −Q−1(q +
CTν⋆). From the equality constraint, it can be derived
that ν⋆ =( CQ−1CT )−1(−CQ−1q +d +h(z)). Note that
CQ−1CT is positive deﬁnite (thus invertible). Let ˆC =
Q−1CT (CQ−1CT )−1, the analytical form for x⋆ can be writ-
ten as
x⋆ =( −Q−1 + ˆCCQ−1)q − ˆC(d +h(z)) (A.2)
which is afﬁne in h(z).
When there exist some active inequality constraints, let ˜λ,
˜A, ˜b, and ˜g(z) be the sub-matrices whose rows are indexed by
the active constraints. Therefore,AT λ⋆ = ˜A
T ˜λ
⋆
and the active
inequality constraint becomes:
˜Ax⋆ + ˜b + ˜g(z)=0 (A.3)
SinceQ is positive deﬁnite, the stationary condition gives that
x⋆ = −Q−1(q + ˜A
T ˜λ
⋆
+CTν⋆) (A.4)
Plugging (A.4) into (A.3) and the equality condition gives the
following matrix form:
Q
( ˜λ
⋆
ν⋆
)
=
(
−˜AQ−1q + ˜b + ˜g(z)
−CQ−1q +d +h(z)
)
  
r(z)
(A.5)
where
Q =
(
˜AQ−1 ˜A
T ˜AQ−1CT
CQ−1 ˜A
T
CQ−1 ˜C
T
)
=
( ˜A
C
)
Q−1
(
˜A
T
CT
)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XU AND TENG: TASK-AW ARE MACHINE UNLEARNING AND ITS APPLICA TION IN LOAD FORECASTING 7187
Due to LICQ, ( ˜A
T
,CT ) is full column rank. Therefore, Q is
positive deﬁnite and from (A.5)
( ˜λ
⋆
ν⋆
)
= Q−1r(z) (A.6)
which is afﬁne in (˜g(z)T,h(z)T )T . Consequently, plugging
(A.6) into (A.4) gives
x⋆ = −Q−1
(
q +( ˜A
T
,CT )Q−1r(z)
)
(A.7)
which is afﬁne in (˜g(z)T,h(z)T )T . ■
Since the optimal solution of every QP satisfying Proposi-
tion 3 is an afﬁne function of the parameter ( (A.2) and (A.7)),
the gradients of the convex layers in the dispatch and re-dispatch
problems exist and can be analytically written regardless of the
perturbed parameter.
Note that with the ﬁnal representation, the optimal solution
x⋆ still needs to be computed in the forward pass as ˜A can only
be determined when x⋆ is known.
C. Proof to Proposition 2
Let f (·;θ⋆
FE) be the trained feature extractor on the pre-train
dataset. Let Xsen ∈RNsen×d be the extracted feature of Dsen as
input to the Linear Layer 2. Nsen is the number of user sensitive
data and d is the output size of feature extractor. Note that d ≪
Nsen andXsen is full column rank by the condition. Meanwhile,
letY sen ∈RNsen×n be the ground truth load over n participants.
The parameter of Linear Layer 2 is denoted as Θ∈Rd×n.
Let y·,i ∈RNsen and θ·,i ∈Rd be the i-th column of Y sen
and Θ, respectively. The ﬁne-tuning objective can be written
as
L(θ)= 1
Nsen ·n
n∑
i=1
∥y·,i −Xsenθi∥2
2 (A.8)
Now deﬁne ˆXsen = diag([Xsen,..., Xsen  
n
]) ∈RNsenn×dn as
a block diagonal matrix packed by n Xsens. ˆY sen =
[yT
·,1,..., yT
·,n]T ∈RNsenn and ˆΘ =[ θT
·,1,..., θT
·,n]T ∈Rdn be
the ﬂattened version of Y sen and Θ, respectively. It can be
veriﬁed that (A.8) is equivalent to
L(θ)= 1
Nsen ·n
(
ˆΘ
T ˆX
T
sen ˆXsen ˆΘ−2Y T
sen ˆXsen ˆΘ+ ˆY
T
sen ˆY sen
)
(A.9)
Since Xsen is full column rank, ˆX
T
sen ˆXsen is positive deﬁnite.
Therefore, (A.9) and (A.8) are quadratic with unique global
minimizer.
D. Detailed Experiment Settings
1) Data Description: The meteorological features in the
Texas Backbone Power System [42] include temperature (k),
long-wave radiation (w / m2), short-wave radiation (w / m2),
zonal wind speed (m / s), meridional wind speed (m / s) and
wind speed (m / s), which are normalized according to their
individual mean and standard deviation. The calendar feature
includes the cosine and sin of the weekday in a week and the
TABLE II
STRUCTURE OF THE CNN LOAD FORECASTING MODEL
TABLE III
STRUCTURE OF THE MLP-MIXER LOAD FORECASTING MODEL WITH EXACT
SETTINGS IN [43]
hour in a day according to their individual period. Therefore,
a single datum is (xi,yi) ∈R14×10 × R14. We also normalize
the target load by its mean and std. Meanwhile, we use the ﬁrst
80% data as training dataset and the remaining as test dataset.
Finally, the IEEE bus-14 system is modiﬁed from PyPower.
2) Linear Load F orecaster: The linear load forecaster can be
found by
min
θ
1
N · 14
N∑
i=1
∥xiθ−yi∥2
2
where θ∈R10. The quadratic objective can be solved analyti-
cally or by using conjugate gradient descent.
3) Convolutional NN Load F orecaster: A CNN is used as
feature extractor, which is summarized in Table II.
4) MLP-Mixer Load F orecaster: MLP-Mixer only contains
two types of multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), which iteratively
capture the information on the feature patches and across the
feature patches. In our load forecast setting, it iteratively captures
the features within each load and across each load. Regardless
of its simple structure, it has been reported that MLP-Mixer
can have a performance comparable to CNN or attention-based
networks, e.g., transformers [43]. The structure of MLP-Mixer
is summarized in Table III..
5) Traing Conﬁguration: We use the same training speciﬁ-
cations for CNN and MLP-Mixer. We select the ﬁrst 30% in
the training dataset as the pre-train dataset and the remaining as
the user-sensitive dataset. The NN forecaster is trained with 100
epochs, batch size of 16, Adam optimizer with learning rate of
10−4 and cosine annealing. We also use early stop and record
the model with the best performance.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
7188 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 39, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Fig. 8. Performance on the CNN load forecaster. First row: performance of complete machine unlearning algorithm (8); Second row: Performance of PAMU and
TAMU with different test criteria.
Fig. 9. Performance on the MLP-Mixer load forecaster. First row: performance of complete machine unlearning algorithm (8); Second row: Performance of
PAMU and TAMU with different test criteria.
E. Extra Experiment Results
The detailed unlearning performances on the CNN and MLP-
Mixer based load forecasting models can be found in Figs.8 and
9, respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Xie, T. Hong, and J. Stroud, “Long-term retail energy forecasting with
consideration of residential customer attrition,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid ,
vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2245–2252, Sep. 2015.
[2] T. Hong and S. Fan, “Probabilistic electric load forecasting: A tutorial
review,” Int. J. F orecasting, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 914–938, 2016.
[3] T. Hong, P . Pinson, Y . Wang, R. Weron, D. Y ang, and H. Zareipour, “Energy
forecasting: A review and outlook,” IEEE Open Access J. Power Energy ,
vol. 7, pp. 376–388, 2020.
[4] E. Ebeid, R. Heick, and R. H. Jacobsen, “Deducing energy consumer
behavior from smart meter data,” Future Internet , vol. 9, no. 3, 2017,
Art. no. 29.
[5] J. Luo, T. Hong, and S.-C. Fang, “Benchmarking robustness of load
forecasting models under data integrity attacks,”Int. J. F orecasting, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 89–104, 2018.
[6] Y . Liang, D. He, and D. Chen, “Poisoning attack on load forecasting,” in
Proc. IEEE Innov. Smart Grid Technol.-Asia, 2019, pp. 1230–1235.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XU AND TENG: TASK-AW ARE MACHINE UNLEARNING AND ITS APPLICA TION IN LOAD FORECASTING 7189
[7] Y . Wang, N. Gao, and G. Hug, “Personalized federated learning for
individual consumer load forecasting,”CSEE J. Power Energy Syst.,v o l .9 ,
no. 1, pp. 326–330, Jan. 2023.
[8] Y . Dong, Y . Chen, X. Zhao, and X. Huang, “Short-term load forecasting
with distributed long short-term memory,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy
Soc. Innov. Smart Grid Technol. Conf. 2022, pp. 1–5.
[9] E. U. Soykan, Z. Bilgin, M. A. Ersoy, and E. Tomur, “Differentially private
deep learning for load forecasting on smart grid,” inProc. IEEE Globecom
Workshops, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[10] J. D. Fernández, S. P . Menci, C. M. Lee, A. Rieger, and G. Fridgen,
“Privacy-preserving federated learning for residential short-term load
forecasting,” Appl. Energy, vol. 326, 2022, Art. no. 119915.
[11] M. A. Husnoo, A. Anwar, N. Hosseinzadeh, S. N. Islam, A. N. Mahmood,
and R. Doss, “A secure federated learning framework for residential
short term load forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 15, no. 2,
pp. 2044–2055, Mar. 2024.
[12] A. Mantelero, “The EU proposal for a general data protection regulation
and the roots of the ‘right to be forgotten’,” Comput. Law Secur . Rev. ,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 229–235, 2013.
[13] T. Shaik, X. Tao, H. Xie, L. Li, X. Zhu, and Q. Li, “Exploring the landscape
of machine unlearning: A survey and taxonomy,” 2023,arXiv:2305.06360.
[14] C. Y u, S. Jeoung, A. Kasi, P . Y u, and H. Ji, “Unlearning bias in language
models by partitioning gradients,” in Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, 2023, pp. 6032–6048.
[15] Y . Zeng, J. Xu, Y . Li, C. Chen, Q. Dai, and Z. Du, “Towards highly-efﬁcient
and accurate services QoS prediction via machine unlearning,” in IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 76242–76254, 2023.
[16] H. Xia et al., “FedME2: Memory evaluation & erase promoting federated
unlearning in DTMN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 41, no. 11,
pp. 3573–3588, Nov. 2023.
[17] Z. Zhang, M. Tian, C. Li, Y . Huang, and L. Y ang, “Poison neural
network-based mmWave beam selection and detoxiﬁcation with machine
unlearning,”IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 877–892, Feb. 2023.
[18] Y . Cao and J. Y ang, “Towards making systems forget with machine
unlearning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur . Privacy, 2015, pp. 463–480.
[19] A. Ginart, M. Guan, G. V aliant, and J. Y . Zou, “Making AI forget you:
Data deletion in machine learning,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 3518–3531.
[20] J. Brophy and D. Lowd, “Machine unlearning for random forests,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , PMLR, 2021, pp. 1092–1104.
[21] A. Golatkar, A. Achille, and S. Soatto, “Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
Selective forgetting in deep networks,” inProc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9304–9312.
[22] A. Peste, D. Alistarh, and C. H. Lampert, “SSSE: Efﬁciently erasing sam-
ples from trained machine learning models,” in Proc. NeurIPS Workshop
Privacy Mach. Learn., 2021.
[23] S. Fu, F. He, Y . Xu, and D. Tao, “Bayesian inference forgetting,” 2021,
arXiv:2101.06417.
[24] A. Golatkar, A. Achille, A. Ravichandran, M. Polito, and S. Soatto,
“Mixed-privacy forgetting in deep networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 792–801.
[25] C. Guo, T. Goldstein, A. Hannun, and L. V an Der Maaten, “Certiﬁed data
removal from machine learning models,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2020, pp. 3832–3842.
[26] J. Bae, N. Ng, A. Lo, M. Ghassemi, and R. B. Grosse, “If inﬂuence
functions are the answer, then what is the question?,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 17953–17967.
[27] T. Hoang, S. Rana, S. Gupta, and S. V enkatesh, “Learn to unlearn for
deep neural networks: Minimizing unlearning interference with gradient
projection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. , 2024,
pp. 4819–4828.
[28] L. Graves, V . Nagisetty, and V . Ganesh, “Amnesiac machine learning,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , 2021, pp. 11516–11524.
[29] L. Bourtoule et al., “Machine unlearning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur .
Privacy, 2021, pp. 141–159.
[30] T. T. Nguyen, T. T. Huynh, P . L. Nguyen, A. W.-C. Liew, H. Yin, and Q. V .
H. Nguyen, “A survey of machine unlearning,” 2022, arXiv:2209.02299.
[31] R. V ohra, A. Rajaei, and J. L. Cremer, “End-to-end learning with multiple
modalities for system-optimised renewables nowcasting,” in Proc. IEEE
Belgrade PowerTech2023, pp. 1–8.
[32] W. Xu, J. Wang, and F. Teng, “E2E-A T: A uniﬁed framework for tackling
uncertainty in task-aware end-to-end learning,” 2023, arXiv:2312.10587.
[33] P . Donti, B. Amos, and J. Z. Kolter, “Task-based end-to-end model learning
in stochastic optimization,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2017, pp. 5490–5500.
[34] R. D. Cook and S. Weisberg, Residuals and Inﬂuence in Regression.N e w
Y ork, NY , USA: Chapman and Hall, 1982.
[35] G. Wu, M. Hashemi, and C. Srinivasa, “PUMA: Performance unchanged
model augmentation for training data removal,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, pp. 8675–8682.
[36] P . W. Koh and P . Liang, “Understanding black-box predictions via inﬂu-
ence functions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2017, pp. 1885–1894.
[37] C. Wang, Y . Zhou, Q. Wen, and Y . Wang, “Improving load forecasting
performance via sample reweighting,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 3317–3320, Jul. 2023.
[38] A. Agrawal, B. Amos, S. Barratt, S. Boyd, S. Diamond, and J. Z. Kolter,
“Differentiable convex optimization layers,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 9562–9574.
[39] F. Zhuang et al., “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” in Proc.
IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, Jan. 2021.
[40] B. A. Pearlmutter, “Fast exact multiplication by the hessian,” Neural
Comput., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 147–160, 1994.
[41] S. Diamond and S. Boyd, “CVXPY: A python-embedded modeling lan-
guage for convex optimization,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 2909–2913, 2016.
[42] J. Lu et al., “A synthetic texas backbone power system with climate-
dependent spatio-temporal correlated proﬁles,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13231.
[43] I. O. Tolstikhin et al., “MLP-mixer: An all-MLP architecture for vision,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 24261–24272.
[44] A. J. Conejo and L. Baringo, Power System Operations , vol. 11, Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2018.
[45] J. Zhang, Y . Wang, and G. Hug, “Cost-oriented load forecasting,” Electric
Power Syst. Res., vol. 205, 2022, Art. no. 107723.
[46] N. Jorge and J. W. Stephen, Numerical Optimization . Berlin, Germany:
Spinger, 2006.
Wangkun Xu (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree in electrical and electronic engineering
from the University of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., in
2018, and the M.Sc. degree in control systems in 2019
from Imperial College London, London, U.K., where
he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His
research interests include machine learning and op-
timization, with application in cyber-physical power
system operation and security.
Fei Teng(Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in electrical engineering from Beihang Uni-
versity, Beijing, China, in 2009, and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Impe-
rial College London, London, U.K., in 2010 and
2015, respectively. He is currently a Senior Lecturer
with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Imperial College London. His research
interests include the power system operation with
high penetration of Inverter-Based Resources (IBRs)
and the Cyber-resilient and Privacy-preserving
cyber-physical power grid.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on August 31,2025 at 13:33:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 